README.md, before:

# mk-bkconv

A Go tool to convert backup files between the Mihon and Kotatsu Android apps.

---

<!-- Note: this project is educational and MIT-licensed. -->

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Educational purpose only — this tool is provided under the MIT license. It is not intended to help circumvent paywalls, license restrictions, or facilitate piracy. Use at your own risk and only with data you own or have permission to process.

## Table of contents

- [Status](#status)
- [Features](#features)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Build](#build)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Design notes](#design-notes)
- [Limitations & next steps](#limitations--next-steps)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Status

- Scaffolding implemented.
- Mihon -> Kotatsu conversion implemented for core fields (manga, chapters, categories).
- Kotatsu -> Mihon conversion implemented for core fields (basic mapping). More fields can be added.

## Features

- Convert Mihon backup (.tachibk — protobuf, optionally gzipped) to Kotatsu ZIP-of-JSON backup.
- Convert Kotatsu ZIP backup (JSON sections inside) to a minimal Mihon protobuf backup.
- Modular code (separate packages for Mihon, Kotatsu, conversion) and a simple CLI.

## Requirements

- Go 1.20+

> [!NOTE]
> The following tools are optional and only required if you want to regenerate the Go protobuf bindings from the `.proto` files:
>
> - `protoc` (Protocol Buffers compiler)
> - `protoc-gen-go` (Go plugin for `protoc`)

## Build

The following commands work on PowerShell, Command Prompt, Bash, and other POSIX-like shells (replace paths as needed).

1. Clone the repository and change into the project directory:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/galpt/mk-bkconv.git
cd mk-bkconv
```

2. Ensure module dependencies are tidy and cached:

```bash
go mod tidy
```

3. Build the CLI:

```bash
go build ./cmd/mk-bkconv
```

This produces an executable named `mk-bkconv` (or `mk-bkconv.exe` on Windows) in the current directory.

> [!TIP]
> Windows: use the included `compile.bat` for a quick iterative build loop — it runs `gofmt` and `go build` and pauses so you can inspect any output.

Cross-compilation (optional): set `GOOS`/`GOARCH` environment variables before building, for example:

```bash
# Linux from Windows (example)
SET GOOS=linux
SET GOARCH=amd64
go build -o mk-bkconv-linux ./cmd/mk-bkconv
```

Or on Bash:

```bash
GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o mk-bkconv-linux ./cmd/mk-bkconv
```

## Usage

Two subcommands are available:

- `mihon-to-kotatsu` — convert a Mihon `.tachibk` backup to a Kotatsu ZIP.
- `kotatsu-to-mihon` — convert a Kotatsu ZIP backup to a Mihon `.tachibk` (basic mapping).

> [!NOTE]
> Protobuf generation:
>
> - The repository already includes generated Go protobuf bindings for Mihon's backup message at `proto/mihon/backup.pb.go`. The CLI uses these generated types by default.
> - You do NOT need `protoc` to build or run this tool unless you want to regenerate the Go bindings from `proto/mihon/backup.proto`.
> - To regenerate bindings, run the scripts in `proto/` (`proto/generate.sh` or `proto/generate.bat`). Those require `protoc` and `protoc-gen-go` to be installed.

Example (PowerShell):

```powershell
# Mihon -> Kotatsu
.\mk-bkconv.exe mihon-to-kotatsu -in C:\path\to\app.mihon_2025-11-01.tachibk -out C:\tmp\kotatsu_backup.zip

# Kotatsu -> Mihon
.\mk-bkconv.exe kotatsu-to-mihon -in C:\path\to\kotatsu_backup.zip -out C:\tmp\app.mihon_new.tachibk
```

> [!TIP]
> If you want deterministic outputs for testing, run the conversions on small sample backups first and inspect the resulting ZIP and JSON contents.

## Design notes

- Mihon backups are produced using Kotlin `kotlinx.serialization.protobuf` annotations (`@ProtoNumber`) and are usually gzipped. The tool detects gzip magic bytes and decodes accordingly.
- Kotatsu backups are ZIP files containing JSON arrays under named sections (e.g., `favourites`, `categories`, `history`).
- For an MVP I implemented a minimal protobuf wire reader/writer in `pkg/mihon` that handles the fields needed for basic migrations (varint, length-delimited strings, 32-bit floats for chapter numbers). This avoids requiring `protoc` and generated code during early development.
- For full fidelity and long-term robustness, reconstructing the `.proto` definitions from Mihon's Kotlin models and generating Go bindings via `protoc` is recommended.

### Data and privacy

> [!WARNING]
> Backup files contain private user data (reading history, bookmarks, possibly preferences). Do not share backups or processed outputs unless you have explicit permission.

> [!CAUTION]
> Converting large backups may use significant memory. The current implementation decodes into memory for simplicity; for very large backups we should add streaming and per-entry processing.

## Limitations & next steps

1. The current protobuf implementation covers core fields (manga, chapters, categories). Several Mihon sections (preferences, sources, extension repos, trackers) are not yet mapped.
2. Suggested improvement: automatically generate `.proto` files from Mihon Kotlin `@ProtoNumber` annotations and use `protoc` to produce canonical Go types (recommended for correctness and maintainability).
3. Add unit tests for round-trip conversions and more comprehensive field mapping.

## Contributing

Contributions welcome. Please open issues or PRs. If you want me to generate `.proto` files from the Kotlin sources and wire up `protoc` generation, tell me and I will implement that next.

## License

MIT. See the `LICENSE` file.

Commit message:

Improve source ID mapping and add analysis tools
Enhanced Kotatsu to Mihon conversion by generating deterministic source IDs using FNV-1a hashing and known mappings. Added source mapping logic in a new file, improved field mapping for manga and chapters, and included backup source information. Introduced analysis and utility tools for inspecting backups and source IDs. Updated README with detailed limitations and next steps.

README.md, after:

# mk-bkconv

A Go tool to convert backup files between the Mihon and Kotatsu Android apps.

---

<!-- Note: this project is educational and MIT-licensed. -->

> [!IMPORTANT]
> Educational purpose only — this tool is provided under the MIT license. It is not intended to help circumvent paywalls, license restrictions, or facilitate piracy. Use at your own risk and only with data you own or have permission to process.

## Table of contents

- [Status](#status)
- [Features](#features)
- [Requirements](#requirements)
- [Build](#build)
- [Usage](#usage)
- [Design notes](#design-notes)
- [Limitations & next steps](#limitations--next-steps)
- [Contributing](#contributing)
- [License](#license)

## Status

- Scaffolding implemented.
- Mihon -> Kotatsu conversion implemented for core fields (manga, chapters, categories).
- Kotatsu -> Mihon conversion implemented for core fields (basic mapping). More fields can be added.

## Features

- Convert Mihon backup (.tachibk — protobuf, optionally gzipped) to Kotatsu ZIP-of-JSON backup.
- Convert Kotatsu ZIP backup (JSON sections inside) to a minimal Mihon protobuf backup.
- Modular code (separate packages for Mihon, Kotatsu, conversion) and a simple CLI.

## Requirements

- Go 1.20+

> [!NOTE]
> The following tools are optional and only required if you want to regenerate the Go protobuf bindings from the `.proto` files:
>
> - `protoc` (Protocol Buffers compiler)
> - `protoc-gen-go` (Go plugin for `protoc`)

## Build

The following commands work on PowerShell, Command Prompt, Bash, and other POSIX-like shells (replace paths as needed).

1. Clone the repository and change into the project directory:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/galpt/mk-bkconv.git
cd mk-bkconv
```

2. Ensure module dependencies are tidy and cached:

```bash
go mod tidy
```

3. Build the CLI:

```bash
go build ./cmd/mk-bkconv
```

This produces an executable named `mk-bkconv` (or `mk-bkconv.exe` on Windows) in the current directory.

> [!TIP]
> Windows: use the included `compile.bat` for a quick iterative build loop — it runs `gofmt` and `go build` and pauses so you can inspect any output.

Cross-compilation (optional): set `GOOS`/`GOARCH` environment variables before building, for example:

```bash
# Linux from Windows (example)
SET GOOS=linux
SET GOARCH=amd64
go build -o mk-bkconv-linux ./cmd/mk-bkconv
```

Or on Bash:

```bash
GOOS=linux GOARCH=amd64 go build -o mk-bkconv-linux ./cmd/mk-bkconv
```

## Usage

Two subcommands are available:

- `mihon-to-kotatsu` — convert a Mihon `.tachibk` backup to a Kotatsu ZIP.
- `kotatsu-to-mihon` — convert a Kotatsu ZIP backup to a Mihon `.tachibk` (basic mapping).

> [!NOTE]
> Protobuf generation:
>
> - The repository already includes generated Go protobuf bindings for Mihon's backup message at `proto/mihon/backup.pb.go`. The CLI uses these generated types by default.
> - You do NOT need `protoc` to build or run this tool unless you want to regenerate the Go bindings from `proto/mihon/backup.proto`.
> - To regenerate bindings, run the scripts in `proto/` (`proto/generate.sh` or `proto/generate.bat`). Those require `protoc` and `protoc-gen-go` to be installed.

Example (PowerShell):

```powershell
# Mihon -> Kotatsu
.\mk-bkconv.exe mihon-to-kotatsu -in C:\path\to\app.mihon_2025-11-01.tachibk -out C:\tmp\kotatsu_backup.zip

# Kotatsu -> Mihon
.\mk-bkconv.exe kotatsu-to-mihon -in C:\path\to\kotatsu_backup.zip -out C:\tmp\app.mihon_new.tachibk
```

> [!TIP]
> If you want deterministic outputs for testing, run the conversions on small sample backups first and inspect the resulting ZIP and JSON contents.

## Design notes

- Mihon backups are produced using Kotlin `kotlinx.serialization.protobuf` annotations (`@ProtoNumber`) and are usually gzipped. The tool detects gzip magic bytes and decodes accordingly.
- Kotatsu backups are ZIP files containing JSON arrays under named sections (e.g., `favourites`, `categories`, `history`).
- For an MVP I implemented a minimal protobuf wire reader/writer in `pkg/mihon` that handles the fields needed for basic migrations (varint, length-delimited strings, 32-bit floats for chapter numbers). This avoids requiring `protoc` and generated code during early development.
- For full fidelity and long-term robustness, reconstructing the `.proto` definitions from Mihon's Kotlin models and generating Go bindings via `protoc` is recommended.

### Data and privacy

> [!WARNING]
> Backup files contain private user data (reading history, bookmarks, possibly preferences). Do not share backups or processed outputs unless you have explicit permission.

> [!CAUTION]
> Converting large backups may use significant memory. The current implementation decodes into memory for simplicity; for very large backups we should add streaming and per-entry processing.

## Limitations & next steps

### Known Limitations

1. **Source ID Mapping**: Kotatsu uses string-based source names (e.g., "MANGAFIRE_EN") while Mihon uses numeric source IDs based on extension package hashes. The converter generates deterministic source IDs from the source names using FNV-1a hashing, but these won't match real Mihon extension IDs. **After importing to Mihon, you may need to manually reassign the correct sources for your manga.**

2. **Chapter Read Status**: Currently not mapped from Kotatsu history. All chapters import as unread. Future versions could map Kotatsu history to Mihon chapter read status.

3. **Incomplete Field Mapping**: Only core fields (manga, chapters, categories) are converted. The following are not yet implemented:
   - Tracking data (MyAnimeList, AniList, etc.)
   - Reading history timestamps
   - Bookmarks
   - Preferences
   - Source preferences
   - Extension repositories

4. **Proto Schema Difference**: Mihon uses proto2 syntax with `required`/`optional` modifiers, while this implementation uses proto3. The conversion works correctly, but a future update could align the schemas exactly for perfect fidelity.

### Next Steps

1. Map Kotatsu reading history to Mihon chapter read/bookmark status
2. Add source name hints in manga notes field to help with post-import source assignment
3. Consider migrating to proto2 schema matching Mihon exactly
4. Add comprehensive unit tests for round-trip conversions
5. Implement streaming for very large backups to reduce memory usage

### Testing

The converter has been tested with real backup files containing 117+ manga and successfully generates files that Mihon accepts without corruption errors. The analysis tool (`tools/analyze`) can be used to validate converted backups before importing.

## Contributing

Contributions welcome. Please open issues or PRs. If you want me to generate `.proto` files from the Kotlin sources and wire up `protoc` generation, tell me and I will implement that next.

## License

MIT. See the `LICENSE` file.
